Question and Answer Session Index  Saturday, November 23 – Questions and Answers 1 
0:00: “Thank you for your talk. Can you flesh out: 'dispassionate about what?' Also, trying to encourage dispassion along with arousing energy.”
4:25 “Is it possible for an arahant to have seemingly negative thoughts and speech?”
13:19 “Can you talk about how to work with infidelity.”
22:38 “Thank you for the wonderful teachings...Can you further discuss dispassion and nonattachment in the context of the 'middle way.' (particularly for a layperson in a loving relationship)”
31:37 “I notice that when my mind is drifting I don't feel physical pain but when 'present' pain comes to the fore. Suggestions?”
38:25 “What do you think about the bed here? I believe its against the 8th precept.”   Sunday, November 24 – Questions and Answers 2  
0:00 “I have seen both monastics and laypeople start getting ill after they became serious about practice. Can you relate this to your talk today? (whether such illness is karmic. Etc.)”
3:51 “Could you clarify the difference between perception (sanna), mental formations (sankara) and conscousness (vinnana)?”
7:06 “Can you talk about neither-painful-nor-pleasant feelings and the benefits of being with this boringness?”
10:33 “Could you please talk about different places in the chain of dependent origination can be broken?”
13:20 “Thank you for the wonderful dhamma talk on the 5 reflections! Could you please talk about compassion in caregiving for themselves and for others.”
17:46 “Reflecting on your talk earlier about letting go...Wondering if you can speak about maintaining a practice during retreat and also in 'normal” life under circumstances (where one has to make many important decisions).”
21:53 “During meditation when thoughts come and want to engage me...is there a point or sign or a warning that can be seen before I get lost?”
26:51 “Dear Ajahn Pasanno, Thank you for all the guidance and encouragement. The past months have been very busy...I am now noticing lots of patterns of tension in my body which make the breath an unpleasant object to stay with. Any advice?”
32:19 “In letting go of thoughts that habitually arise from negative self-criticism or from past trauma defenses, how do we ask these powerful mental states to not overwhelm our mindfulness?”
33:14 “Could you clarify whether having more than one meditation object is a help or a hindrance?”
39:17 “Thank you for your uplifting and encouraging talks. My husband died 6 months ago. Could you give suggestions for how to contemplate anicca and anatta in the context of his life, illness, and death?”
44:43 “Is there a distinction between dispassion and equanimity?”
46:09 “Thank you for your wonderful teaching. Q: How to identify and deal with 'Panca upadana' in daily life?”
49:56 “Ajahn, Its seems like the first couple of days all hindrances attack to a point where I opened my eyes this morning meditation and thought: 'How did I get here?...Can you please comment.”   Monday, November 25 – Questions and Answers 3  
0:00 “Is body scan as a meditation practice done in the Ajahn Chah tradition? Is there a sutta where the Buddha talks about it?”
3:43 “Is there something in the body that will help you identify the defilement of delusion?”
4:16 “If one has read the Majjhima Nikaya, what text of the Pali canon do you recommend reading next?”
6:35 “I'm having trouble integrating some of the teachings in the context of preparing to have a child...How might one be fully open to the lightness and joy surrounding birth while remaining deeply aware of these other truths of existence?”
12:40 “Sorry, I missed something. Did you say that instead of dwelling on our hindrances and getting depressed, we could instead work with the Factors of Enlightenment to brighten the mind? What are the Factors you would suggest?”
17:18 “Can you please give perspective on thoughts/feelings of inadequacy and comparison to others?”
23:48 “Can you please talk about qualities (physical sensations) one would experience in different Jhana sates?”
26:24 “Are there harmful states of concentration? How would you potentially go down the wrong path? Is there a question you could ask yourself?”
30:16 “About a year ago, I was bullied and sexually harassed by a married male coworker...Any guidance as to how I can work with this and move beyond it?”
34:10 “Would you please elaborate on mental formations and volition.”
37:43 “Once I aspired to open my mind beyond this conditioned world. Now I mostly try to be at ease with my limitations. Am I forgetting something important?”
40:42 “Some monks have told me I'm selfish for being so focused on release. They say I should help others more. What are your thoughts?”
42:10 “What are the 4 stages of Enlightenment? What defilements have the four Noble Beings shed?”
43:45 “Could you please expand on compassionate seclusion in interactive daily life (both on and off retreat)?”
47:20 “Thank you Luang Por for your time and teachings. I would like to hear more about the idea of restraint (especially in regards to raising a teenager).”
50:57 “Would you please talk a bit about karma in past lives...I'm asking for future karmic results an preventing negative ones.”
53:16 “How do you teach noting/labeling in meditation?”
56:47 “I was interested to hear the definition of mental formations as volitional...Could you help me reconcile (random and unbidden thoughts) with volitionality?”
59:11 “What suggestions do you have when thoughts of transgression of sila arise. I cannot change the past, but I have regrets.”
1:04:16 “Please explain the inner workings of right intention and its karmic effect.” 
 Tuesday, November 26 – Questions and Answers 4  
00:00 “Please explain again: When one restores concentration by focusing on the in-andouttake of the breath, is one using the vinnana/consciousness of the grasping mind?”
3:14 “During retreats I sometimes have dreams in which my actions are unskillful. Does one eventually keep the precepts even in dreams?”
4:31“'Like exercise makes the body strong, inner stillness makes the mind strong.' Why stillness and not awareness?”
6:18“It has been a few years since my last retreat. May I request a reminder on how to practice metta mediation on oneself...I seem to have forgotten.”
15:49 “Would you please give an example of how wholesome qualities can condition unwholesome qualities?”
18:12 “I feel like a kid whose father has told a story and there is more to tell...Please father do tell (about non-complicated thoughts etc.).”
19:00 “I have a hard time ending or letting go of relationships after they no longer serve me or prove to be unskillful people...Is this attachment to person or aversion/ fear etc of the unknown?”
22:55 “How do you decrease the times an obsessive thought arises in the mind?...What is obsession anyways?”
26:20 “I've been sitting on this question...It has to do with dispassion, shedding, simplifying and being easily satisfied on the one end of the spectrum and being engaged and active in the world...How can one practice shedding internally but still be responsive and engaged regarding the suffering from environmental and social issues?”
33:33 “Could you please explain again the differences between sanna, sankara, and vinnana? I'm still not getting it.”
36:30 “Is there an obligation to reconcile with family before your death or theirs (especially when family has been particularly unskillful towards us)?”
42:38 “What is meant by 'fools'...the Buddha's definition of a fool.”
43:39 “Is there anything skillful about crying, the flow of tears?”
45:38 “How does one reconcile the apparent complete lack of control that is experienced in meditation...with the apparent need to control one's circumstances off the cushion. Is it possible to live with complete non-contention and still have an organized life?” 
 Wednesday, November 27 – Questions and Answers 5  
00:00 “What is the funeral protocol for monks? What about non-monastics in the West?”
8:42 “Over the last couple of years, I've been noticing that memory retention isn't quite what it used to be...In your experience, has meditation practice helped sharpen the memory?”
10:33 “I've been reflecting on 'no-self' and it hasn't quite been resonating. Instead it feels like daunting abstraction. Can you suggest a simple way to approach this?”
14:02 “I saw one of your new publications 'Don't Hold Back.' Why did you choose this title? The chapter on chanting answered many questions I had.”
15:03 “Funeral and memorial services are not only important for those left behind, but maybe important for the new traveler in afterlife. Could you say more about supporting a dead person? What kind of support and how long? Years? Does 'human support' matter or does 'karma' of each individual 'take care of it'?”
23:25 “I found your explanation of the theme of 'constancy' in practice as a constancy in keeping a bright and awake mind more helpful and do-able than a constancy in keeping to one meditation object as is sometime taught. Could you please say more.”
26:38“Would you please comment on 'The Highest Blessings' where is reads: 'Avoiding those of foolish ways...and cherishing family.' What if family members engage in foolish ways like addiction to alcohol and one can not always avoid them? Can one cherish one of foolish ways?”
30:20 “It seems that every year I expect less from myself at a retreat [but also]...every year a retreat becomes easier and more peaceful. Would you say this is because: a) I am getting wiser? b) I am abandoning all intentions? Or c) I am running out of hormones?”
32:17“Where do the Brahma-Viharas fit into the 4 Noble Truths?'
34:25 “Thank you for the most profound expository discourse on Ananpanasati...How do you practice it? Do you memorize it and note all the aspects (tick them off and get a certificate)?”
39:49 “Is the pursuit of peace, cessation, stillness any different from any other pursuit or desire?”
43:03 “Can you please speak about dealing with physical pain during a sit (particularly back pain and headaches)?”
49:38 “It seems like the 'Reflection on the 32 Parts' of the body is missing several parts...Is it meant to be comprehensive? Or is it just the ugly bits?”
54:46 “Please explain which comes first birth or becoming for example with anger or any feeling or character?” 
 Thursday, November 28 – Questions and Answers 6  
00:00 “Can you tell us about how Ajahn Chah taught Western monks when he doesn't know English?”
3:38 “If this question is okay, could you please tell us any more about how Ajahn Chah challenged you in those first five years – and/or later?”
5:23“I'm trying to be with the breath without controlling it. When I let go of control, the breath seems to accelerate so that I can't keep up with it. Help!”
9:34 “Is it okay to do standing meditation in here during meditation sessions when nothing else is working for sleepiness or restlessness?”
12:01 “In the chant 'Suffusion with the Divine Abidings,' what does it mean “I will abide pervading the all encompassing world with a heard imbued with loving-kindness. Likewise the second...third...fourth'? Why does it not say something like 'pervading the entire heart?””
13:14 “Thank you for the teachings...Could you speak about the hear and mind which appear to be used interchangeably. How can we listen with discernment to the heart? How can we cultivate its strength?”
18:01 “Was metta taught as a concentration earlier than Buddhagosa? Also, how is it taught in the Thai Forest Tradition now?”
23:00 “Ajahn Karunadhammo (it certainly takes a lot of ink to write out your name), your talk today was incredibly timely.”
23:33 “Thank you All for the abundant, exalted, immeasurable gratitude that I am presently experiencing as streaming out of my citta and heading right toward you. Don't duck.”
24:00 “In the article 'Consciousnesses' by Ajahn Lee, he talks about beings that inhabit the mind and body...What are your thoughts on this? When seeing unusual phenomena that can be interpreted in this way, what is a good course of action?”
27:23 “Would you please describe the 4 ways of skillfully answering or asking questions or the different types of questions?”
28:40 “In 'Homage to the Sangha' chant, what are the 'Four pairs, the eight kinds of Noble Beings?'”
29:52 “It makes sense that loving-kindness is the antidote to a person-directed ill-will, but what is the antidote to a more recurring, low-level, general aversion to experience?”
35:23 “Where are the paramis listed and described in the Pali Canon?”
37:23 “What would you say to someone who committed suicide if you could?”
41:41 “Why does the chanting book begin with the evening chanting first?”
42:11“Is there anything in the teachings/scriptures that would relate to the idea of organ donation?”
45:12 “After your 17 talks on Anapanasati, were you out of breath?”
47:27 “Are there any times or situations where formal practice is not particularly helpful? If so, please explain why and then some alternative practices.” 
 Friday, November 29 – Questions and Answers 7 
00:00 “Would you mind sharing some of the difficulties you have had in your practice and how you resolved them?”
4:30 “Can you talk about karma? (particularly in regard to the theory of specific cause yields similar result; and results from past life actions)”
8:22 “As the Buddha referred to his past lives in measurements of eons and eons, is there any information he offered about the locality of hjs lives? Were they on planet Earth?”
10:58 “How is being 'the one who knows' as it is suggested, related to anatta?”
12:35 “I've been reflecting on the buildup of 30 water bottles outside the hall...Can you speak about how we find security in such objects please?”
13:57 “Is the following correct? -The 3 Characteristics can be seen as verbs? The end of Dukkha occurs when the 3 Characteristics are fully understood..? Dukkha in the outside world continues but one who realized the Truth is not 'dukkha-ed' because anatta is understood?”
15:56 “Today, and several times on retreat, I've found myself in a heavy mood and feeling torn between equanimity with the experience and using intention to shift my mental state...Any thoughts are much appreciated.”
16:22 “Also, related to this is-how does volition fit with anatta?”
19:14 “Is there consciousness (awareness, knowing) in the experience of nibbana or is there a complete cessation of all six senses, as some traditions say. (Particularly in relation to the experience of stream-entry, which is sometimes described as a cessation.)”
22:19 “Mudita, gladness, joy, can be felt by listening to Dhamma, chanting, an uplifting shrine...I heard that mudita can be a moment or a way of enlightenment. Could you comment please.”
25:48 “How do you atone for past unskillful behavior that you know you have done? Will this lower the negative karma you reap?”
29:23 “My mind went to the elements today and how the sense feel them...but can all senses feel all elements? On death, air and fire are gone but water and earth remain. Is this correct? Are these skillful reflections?”
32:54 “Would you kindly review the 4 Ways to respond to questions?”
34:52 “How can we awaken the sense metta within the heart and would you help me understand the beautiful image of the heat being a vessel filled with loving kindness that you bring people into rather than sending it out.”
41:23 “Can you please talk a little bit about merit. How do you make it?”
43:34 “Does [merit] have to be intentional?”
43:54 “Is there a difference in doing a good deed for a monastic versus a lay-person in regards to generating merit? Can only humans create merit..devas..animals?”
46:56 “When meditating, I've begun to ask myself: 'What is the cause of suffering?' A couple of sense desires arise, namely, the lack of intimacy and lack of a healthy relationship with a partner. Do I need to let these (seemingly normal) desires go to get down the path?”
49:46 “One practice is to cultivate joy, happiness...But if these are 'defilements of insight,' I feel empty. Any comment.”
52:26 “Can you talk about path and fruit in regards tot he stages of awakening? What are they? How are they different?”
56:12 “Could you please talk a bit more about the 3 types of liberation (signless, desireless, not self?). Is it a liberation in the sense of being free from suffering?”
57:21 “May I ask what was done with the ashes/bones of the monk cremated in Thailand?”
1:01:21“Would you be willing to tell as a little about the first steps that led you out of Northern Manitoba towards becoming an abbot in Thailand?”
1:02:48 “Thank you for your talk today. Could you please expand further on how to maintain/practice tranquility in everyday life, especially as we 'pick up' many of the things in out lives. Could you please tell us the translation of Luang Por and also if its appropriate for laity to address you by this term?”
1:07:13 “One of the questions last night talked about the breath becoming rapid when not controlled. I'm confused. Am I right that we are not supposed to control our breath. Anapanasati is not like pranayama or a breathing exercise. Please clarify.”
1:08:53 “Seems like the more I 'see clearly,' the more depressed (bordering on suicidal at times) I feel rather than freedom...Any practice suggestions?”
1:14:30 “After 20 plus years of having a daily practice and Dharma being first priority, I just up and stopped meditating one day about 2 years ago...Can you talk about this 'rolling up the mat' [phenomenon]? Why it happens, how and when, etc?”
1:18:43 “Why would consciousness not be considered self?”
1:20:01 “What is the '10,000 fold universal world system mentioned in The Discourse on Setting in Motion the Wheel of Dhamma'” 
 Saturday, November 30 – Questions and Answers 8 
00:00 “Just curious- is there any explanation of how bones turn to crystal?”
1:48 “At what point did your practice change from serving yourself (to end your own suffering) to self-less service?”
5:10 “I relinquished my anger...and I had no idea what a heavy burden I was clinging to until it was gone.”
5:38 “Would you talk about (describe) how to relax into 'whole-body breathing?' What does that mean?”
9:53 “How much did the Buddha encourage his disciples to become enlightened to 'get off the wheel' versus experiencing freedom from suffering in this lifetime?”
10:50 “What do you see as the future for women ordaining in Theravada Buddhism?”
11:54 “In the chant '10 Subject for Frequent Recollection,' what does 'one who had gone forth' mean? Anyone on the path or only monastics?”
15:46 “Can we talk at breakfast please?”
16:16 “How can one work with feeling the element of water in sitting or walking meditation?”
18:29 “In the 'Supreme Praise of the Dhamma [and] the Sangha' why are the Dhamma and Sangha referred to as 'My Lord and guide?'”
20:15 “I had a hard time getting up this morning...Any advice on getting up?”
27:36 “You mentioned that Ajahn Chah stated that samadhi should be accompanied by alertness. Does this mean that Jhana should not be a 'zoned out' state?”
30:25 “Also, What are the 4 aspects of bhavana that you mentioned?”
32:12 “I've been experiencing a similar type of irritation as Debbie mentioned in her talk. I feel I'm present as it arise and think I'm letting it go only to find its turned into a big clump or irritation. I'm still unclear as to how to work with this. Please advise.”
34:17 “'There is no-self in the created or the un-created'...Does this statement conceal an asymmetry? Surely we investigate the created to separate from it – But can we investigate the uncreated? And if so, is it not to identify with it?”
38:19 “Do you miss Ajahn Amaro?”
41:00 “Thank you for your inspiring teachings...Q1-I seem to recollect that the Buddha cautioned against unwholesome thoughts in a way that seemed to raise their results as similar to their unwholesome causes. Is this so?”
43:18 “No room for the second question.”
43:27 “Does the 5th precept include coffee or prescription drugs as drugs to avoid? Does the precept mean never drink alcohol or don't abuse alcohol for a lay person?...Does Right Livelihood mean one cannot work in a place that serves and/or sells alcohol, coffees, or drugs? Or, does it mean don't work where alcohol and drugs are made?”
50:33 “Today is the 23rd anniversary of my grandmother’s passing. I am particularly thinking of her today and dedicating loving kindness. Is this a meritorious act or is this fantasy?”
52:11 “Please explain the difference between aggregates and faculties.”
54:06 “What is the difference between ignorance and delusion?”